title: 10th VAST International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archeology and Cultural Heritage 
link: http://electricarchaeology.ca/2009/03/27/10th-vast-international-symposium-on-virtual-reality-archeology-and-cultural-heritage/
author: fhg1711
description: 
post_id: 578
created: 2009/03/27 12:08:13
created_gmt: 2009/03/27 17:08:13
comment_status: open
post_name: 10th-vast-international-symposium-on-virtual-reality-archeology-and-cultural-heritage
status: publish
post_type: post

# 10th VAST International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archeology and Cultural Heritage 

First call for papers: 

> 10th VAST International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archeology and Cultural Heritage 7th Eurographics Workshop on Graphics and Cultural Heritage (VAST'09) September 22-25, 2009, Valletta, Malta [http://www.vast2009.org](http://www.vast2009.org/) ====================================================================================== \-------------------- Call for Papers \-------------------- -Towards a "digital agenda" for the integration of technologies into Archeology and Cultural Heritage- Nearly every organization whose mission includes promoting access to cultural information, is well aware of the value of digital applications, and digital technologies are finding their way into cultural organizations. Nevertheless, a clear-cut division still exists between humanities researchers, computer science researchers, information scientists, librarians, and campus technologists, which prevents a complete achievement of the  potential represented by the integration of these disciplines. Each community has distinctive practices, lingo, assumptions, and concerns. Understanding technology needs of the humanities, and more specifically of Archaeology, Libraries and Cultural Heritage, has particular relevance to the future of knowledge and education delivery, as well as, to develop shared technology services to enhance humanities research now and in the future. The main goal of this VAST is to bring together professionals from all fields to start a true dialogue on CH needs and ICT solutions and achieve a true integration of disciplines. This VAST aims at disseminating the idea of a more systematic integration of digital practices in research and education programs for CH, exploring good practices, guidelines and skills development possibilities to structure long-term initiatives and move towards a "digital agenda" for Archaeology, Libraries and CH. This is why we are seeking contributions that advance the state of the art in the technologies available to support sustainability of human heritage. \- 2/3/4D Data Capture and Processing in CH \- Augmentation of physical collections with digital presentations \- Data Acquisition Technologies \- Digital Libraries \- Digital capture and annotation of intangible heritage (performance, audio, dance, oral) \- Interactive Environments and Applications for CH \- Long term preservation of digital artefacts \- Metadata, classification schema, ontologies and semantic processing \- Multilingual applications, tools and systems for CH \- Multimedia Data Acquisition, Management and Archiving \- Multi-modal interfaces and rendering for CH \- On-site and remotely sensed data collection \- Professional and Ethical Guidelines \- Serious games in CH \- Standards and Documentation \- Storytelling and Design of Heritage Communications \- Tools for Education and Training in CH \- Usability, Effectiveness and Interface Design for CH Applications \- Visualization \- KEYNOTE SPEAKERS - Archeology: Dr Zahi Hawass - General Secretary of the Supreme Council of Antiquities of Egypt Museums: Mme. Christiane Naffah - Director of the Research and Restoration Center for France Museums \- BEST PAPERS AWARD - The best papers presented at VAST 2009 will be selected for re-submission on a special edition of the upcoming ACM Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage (JOCCH), an online, peer reviewed publication. \- (NEW!) VAST-STARs - VAST 2009 introduces the "VAST-STate-of-the-Art Reports (VAST-STARs)", inspired by the EG STARs. These are papers providing useful novel overviews of research in the fields of computer graphics, computer science  and related fields that can benefit the multidisciplinary nature of VAST. They are survey papers in what the community considers important areas that have not been covered before or recently. Their aim is to give a detailed account of the principles, algorithms and open problems of a research area, so that an interested reader can quickly become up to speed in this field.  We warmly encourage all colleagues to submit to the VAST-STARs reports. The VAST-STARs will be published with the full papers and are also eligible for the best paper award. Two VAST-STARs will be selected by peer review and will be published in the EG proceedings together with the full papers.  VAST-STARs authors will present their work with a 60 minute presentation during VAST 2009. \- PAPER SUBMISSIONS - We are soliciting five types of contributions: =Full research papers presenting new innovative results. These papers will be published by Eurographics in a high-quality proceedings volume. =VAST-STARs providing a useful novel overview of research in the fields of computer graphics, computer science  and related fields that can benefit the multidisciplinary nature of VAST. =Project papers focusing on on-going projects, the description of project organization, use of technology, and lesson learned not innovative technical content. These papers will have an oral presentation and will be included in a "Projects & Short Papers" proceedings volume. Authors will have the option to present a poster during the breaks to provide more information regarding the project. =Short papers presenting preliminary ideas and works-in-progress. These papers will have an oral presentation and will be published in the "Projects & Short Papers" proceedings volume. =Tutorials and Workshops: half-day and full-day working sessions that provide an opportunity to educate and share on key topics of interest face-to-face. Tutorial submissions will be published in the "Projects & Short Papers" proceedings volume. Workshops that provide supplemental materials in time for the CD-ROM printing will also be included. All material will be made available on the VAST 2009 website. All types of submissions will be reviewed and feedback given to the authors. See detailed information on the VAST 2009 website under Submissions. \- COMMITTEES - Event Committee: Kurt Debattista - University of Warwick, Sandro Spina - University of Malta Program Committee: Cinzia Perlingieri - University of California at Berkeley, Denis Pitzalis - The Cyprus Institute, STARC Local Organisational Committee: Sandro Spina - University of Malta, Chris Porter - University of Malta, Keith Bugeja - University of Warwick. VAST-STARs Committee: Fotis Liarokapis (Coventry University - UK), Michael Ashley - University of California at Berkeley \- ISC - Achille Felicetti (PIN - University of Florence) Aderito Marcos (Universidade do Minho - Portugal) Alan Chalmers (University of Warwick - UK) Alan Smeaton (Dublin City University - Ireland) Alberto Proenca (Universidade do Minho - Portugal) Daniel Pletinckx (Visual Dimension - Belgium) Daniel Thalmann (Virtual Reality Lab - Switzerland) David Arnold (University of Brighton - UK) Erik Champion (Massey University - New Zealand) Eva Zányi (University of Warwick - UK) Fotis Liarokapis (Coventry University - UK) Graeme Earle (University of Southampton) Holly Rushmeier (Yale University - USA) Kriste Sibul (ICOM-CC - Estonia) Jean Angelo Beraldin (National Research Council - Canada) Juan Barcelo (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona - Spain) Michael Ashley (University of California at Berkeley) Milena Dobreva  (Institute of Mathematics and Informatics - Bulgaria) Karina Rodriguez-Echavarria (University of Brighton - UK) Luis Paulo Santos (Universidade do Minho - Portugal) Mercedes Farjas (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid - Spain) Nadia Thalmann (MIRALAB - Switzerland) Paolo Cignoni (ISTI - CNR -Italy) Robert Sablatnig (Vienna University of Technology - Austria) Roberto Scopigno (ISTI-CNR - Italy) Sofia Pescarin (CNR - Italy) Stephen Stead (Paveprime Ltd - UK) Vittore Casarosa (CNR - Italy) Maria Theodoridou (FORTH - Institute of Computer Science - Greece) Bianca Falcidieno (CNR - Italy) Isabelle Bloch (ENST - France) \- IMPORTANT DATES - Abstract submission (full/project/short/workshops/tutorials/VAST-STARs): 12th May 2009 (23:59 PTZ) Paper submission for full papers and short papers: 15th May 2009 (23:59 PTZ)

## Comments

**[Indiana Nirvana](#1957 "2009-04-03 03:08:33"):** Hi Shawn, Well it would seem we have a lot in common! I am a little busy right now, but I will be looking into your posts shortly. Just thought I would say hello! Best wishes, Indiana

**[MOBEE N KAYODE](#2048 "2009-05-22 13:27:18"):** hello i m interested in participating in your 2009 events thanks

