title: Rolling your own: early draft
link: http://electricarchaeology.ca/2010/04/22/rolling-your-own-early-draft/
author: fhg1711
description: 
post_id: 929
created: 2010/04/22 08:29:48
created_gmt: 2010/04/22 13:29:48
comment_status: open
post_name: rolling-your-own-early-draft
status: publish
post_type: post

# Rolling your own: early draft

I thought I'd try something different. I'm giving a paper at a conference before too long, and I thought I'd solicit feedback on it *before* I give it: I'll write the thing in public. I am always such crap when it comes to properly formatting citations etc, and I have a mental block when it comes to words that sound alike... so please be gentle. Feedback in the comments, please. This terrifies me, to some extent, but I watched a similar experiment unfold on [Grand Text Auto](http://www.grandtextauto.org) a while back, which had excellent results. And so, I offer: **Rolling your Own: On Modding Commercial Games for Educational Goals** **Shawn Graham – University of Manitoba, Grand Canyon University** Making modifications to existing commercial games is a strong and vibrant sub-culture in modern video gaming. Strictly speaking, 'modding' refers to actually changing the rules by which a game operates, but a less rigorous definition includes scenario building, or the set up of the pieces on the game board. Many publishers now provide tools to make this easier, as part of their marketing strategy. Talented individuals who make and release mods or scenarios for popular games such as the _Civilization _franchise have been been plucked from the fan communities to employment with the publishers (Jon Shafer, lead designer of the upcoming Civilization V, is one notable example).  Most scholars who have focused on Civilization have addressed its narrative of technological progress and American exceptionalism (REFS); others have concentrated on how the game can be employed in classroom settings, its anachronisms and theoretical outlook on history (Sid Meier famously stating that he did not set out to create a work of history, he wanted to create a game). In this piece, I wish to focus attention on the fansites as the locus for learning. I too wanted to use Civilization for paedegogical ends in my online classroom. With the help of participants on civfanatics.com, I created a scenario (with one rule change; thus a mod) to address a problem I was having in my Introduction to Roman History class. I carefully crafted a scenario to reflect the events of AD 69, the Year of the Four Emperors, devised an assignment to go with it, and launched it on my students. It was a flop. Its lack of success I suspect is due to the 'creepy treehouse' phenomenon (Stein, 2008), referring to the urban legends surrounding treehouses built with no other purpose but to lure children. In online learning, the 'creepy treehouse' plays out as a use of some aspect of social media that does not emerge naturally from the class dynamic, but rather is imposed from on top and thus feels artificial to the participants – an instructor who requires every student to post 3 times a week to the class blog, for instance. In this paper I explore just how my experiment with modding and scenario building ended with a 'creepy treehouse'. That experience refocused my attention to the fansites themselves and the participants who helped me build my scenario. This points us as educators to an under appreciated value of game-based learning using commercial video games. When we 'roll our own', it is the aspect of creating it in public that might have the greatest educational impact. The nature of the fansites promotes the kind of learning we labor to facilitate in our online classrooms, spontaneously and from the bottom up: teaching without teachers. **The Year of the Four Emperors**** ** The death of Nero launched the Empire into a period of turmoil and civil war, with four Emperors being declared in various parts of the Empire, in quick succession. My introduction to Roman history class were struggling with the period. Vespasian was the last of the four contenders to be declared Emperor by his troops. In looking at the period, my students were explaining Vespasian's success in pacifying the Empire and consolidating his hold on Rome in terms of his later role as Emperor: “Of course Vespasian would win the civil war because Vespasian was the Emperor.” This is to put the cart before the horse. As I discussed the period with them, I realized that part of the problem, aside from confusion of cause and effect, was a poor understanding of the realities of Mediterranean geography and of the difficulties of communications in a pre-industrial world (factoring in the time it took for news to travel and how that influenced the political dynamic). I wanted my students to understand the contingency of history, that Vespasian's eventual triumph was not fore-ordained, and that physical and political geography played a role. Thus I embarked on the creation of a scenario, using _Civilization IV_. Civ IV comes with a piece of software for setting up scenarios, the 'world builder'. I quickly became frustrated with using it. It is meant to allow the player to place all of the different pieces on the map, to set up the starting positions for the game. Many of its features are disabled, and cannot be unlocked until the player adds a line of code to the Civilization initialization file. This information is not provided by the game's documentation, but rather comes from the fan sites. Trying to unlock the worldbuilder led me to the modding community (indeed my post relating what the unlock code is, is consistently the most visited post on my research blog). As I became more and more excited about the possibilities of scenario building, I came to rely more and more on the fan sites for help (principally, [www.civfanatics.com](http://www.civfanatics.com/)). Civilization IV was built using XML to describe nearly every object in the game. By adjusting the information in the XML, one can change the names of leaders or cultures (or add more); one can adjust the game calendar so that each turn represents a single day, week, or month. One can add ancillary information to set the scene for the scenario when it opens, or prevent certain kinds of technology from ever being 'discovered' (a world without gunpowder, for instance). How to find this information, how to change it, was all courtesy of the fans. Eventually, with the help of 'Carloquillo', I had a working scenario of the Roman world in AD69. The aim was to outmanouevre the other claimants to the throne, whether politically or militarily (the 'Senate' would examine the balance of power in Italy periodically, and declare one or the other of the rivals to be the 'Emperor' – thus simulating the ineffectualness of the Senate at this period). The scenario was not perfect of course – Vespasian kept converting to Judaism if the artificial intelligence was allowed to play as him. I devised an assessment exercise for my online students. Instead of writing the final paper, I would instead have the students play the scenario through. At set intervals, they would take a screenshot of the world map, and record a narrative of what was going on in their counterfactual history (they would be its historians). Then, to conclude they would identify and address the similarities and differences between the game's version of 'history' with what had in fact happened in the past (which would make a virtue of Vespasian's conversion to Judaism, for instance). My hope was that in playing the scenario the students would begin to appreciate the difficulty of Vespasian's position, initially; how difficult it was to act; what an accomplishment it was in fact to manage and control such an enormous hetergeneous territory; and by identifying anachronisms better understand the important concepts of the period.

## Comments

**[Shawn](#3208 "2010-05-06 18:35:46"):** FYI, civ modding community as an 'affinity community' - http://www.trevorowens.org/2010/05/the-interest-driven-curriculum-and-online-affinity-communities/ Got some great feedback at the conference... watch for an update on this! (and thank you Sinclair for your comments). Shawn

**[craftbition](#3031 "2010-04-22 11:23:46"):** Hmmm. I found myself wanting to know more about what constituted a 'creepy treehouse.' (It was the first time I've heard the term). The brief description given didn't seem to quite cover the range of the concept. Other than that, seems pretty good. Why aren't the regimented routines and activities imposed on students in conventional classrooms also 'creepy treehouses'? Just because they have become convention? Do you think "approaching it as a fan" is how 'conventional teaching' started? It sure does explain a lot about why things like class online forums always flopped... even during exam season when you'd think everyone might be collaborating on studying. I always thought it was a pity since being deaf, textual discussion is far easier and inclusive for me than lipreading.

**[Sinclair](#3165 "2010-04-29 19:13:02"):** As a university student who has used forums in the past quite extensively I can safely attest to many of the findings you have shown us here. I also have found a severe lacking in university-run forums, especially in that they do not seem to foster actual discussion. Many of my professors - And I am not blaming them in any way - simply use it as a tool for students to turn in weekly assignments. I find this problematic, however, as it not only seems to stifle educationally valuable discussion, but also seems to push students away from the institution of the 'forum' in general. While the posts of my colleagues were educationally valuable by your scale, they stood alone and were not interrelated. On many public forums I have encountered the type of "less valuable" talk you have described, but I have also found goldmines of information from experts I never would have found elsewhere. Information I gathered went from getting specifications on an old bicycle I inherited from my mother (someone actually even scanned in the original catalog for me from 1983!), to modding the aesthetics / game world of popular games such as Half-Life (in very similar ways to which you did). I feel as if the 'forum' is perhaps the most unappreciated social network of our modern age, and it turns out (at least for me) to be the most useful and the least time consuming. Finding this information through facebook, for example, would be horribly inefficient. I hope someday we will be able to spark the kinds of conversations I have seen in forums outside of the classroom in an academic environment, although for now I am not sure as how exactly to do this.

**[Shawn](#3077 "2010-04-26 06:48:42"):** Hi Craftbition! I think you're right, in that both students & teachers understand the conventions of a traditional classroom, and so 'creepy treehouse' doesn't apply there - although it could, if some new student activity was appropriated by the teacher... thank you for the feedback. I will see what I can do to make that section clearer. A problem I've always had in my writing is that I tend to 'compress' my thoughts... :)

