title: Mining the Open Web with 'Looted Heritage' - draft
link: http://electricarchaeology.ca/2012/06/08/mining-the-open-web-with-looted-heritage-draft/
author: fhg1711
description: 
post_id: 1491
created: 2012/06/08 13:03:01
created_gmt: 2012/06/08 18:03:01
comment_status: open
post_name: mining-the-open-web-with-looted-heritage-draft
status: publish
post_type: post

# Mining the Open Web with 'Looted Heritage' - draft

What follows is a draft of a paper written in conjunction with Robert Blades concerning the [Looted Heritage project](http://heritage.crowdmap.com). **Introduction** In his overview of what ‘open access’ might mean in the academy, Peter Suber draws attention to the salient features of what it means to call something ‘open’ - that it is digital, the cost (to the reader) is free, and most copyright or similar legal restrictions are relaxed (Suber 2012). In this paper, we describe ‘Looted Heritage’, a developing digital archaeology project and its early results that explore ways of leveraging open content, of dealing with the firehose of data that comes when materials can be freely collected and examined. We focus not on the academic open access movement, but rather on the torrent of archaeological materials shared through social media streams such as Twitter and blogs. We focus on user-generated content surrounding the trade in illicit antiquities, reports of looting, and explore the patterns in this data, of not just _what_ is shared, but _why. _ In a way, our approach is the inverse of ‘crowdsourcing’. To crowdsource something,  whether a problem of software development, or the need to transcribe historical documents, is generally to fracture a problem into its component pieces, allowing an interested public to solve them. In archaeology, such approaches are starting to find currency in everything from funding fieldwork (Morgan 2011) to the entire excavation and its subsequent interpretation (Wilkins et al. 2012; Wilkins, B 2012). In 2011 I and my students embarked on a project to crowdsource the idea of ‘sense of place’, using an open-source software platform to solicit and collect community memories about cultural heritage resources in Central Canada (Graham, Massie and Feuerherm 2011). One of our findings in that project concerned the order of operations that should be followed, that perhaps it is better to collect what is freely available first, before asking the crowd to fill in the gaps (Graham, Massie, and Feuerherm 2011). Accordingly, we set up a data-trap, to collect the tiny pieces out on the open access web. We then study these pieces using data mining and text analysis to develop a picture of what is happening _right now_. It is a kind of digital excavation, and what we are excavating is the world of social media. We then put all of our data, and our analysis, online to allow others to fill in the gaps. When we mine the open web for information about looted cultural heritage, what are the discourses? What are people saying, does what they say change over time, and do these trends and this excercise hold any lessons for us as archaeologists? **Social Media** The business model for many popular social media websites/services is built on allowing users to connect with other users, selling this data onwards to marketers. The microblogging website Twitter caches every ‘tweet’ (short messages of 140 characters) after approximately two weeks and sells them. The marketers then mine this data looking to predict the next big thing, or to understand the public perception of their product (Barnett 2012).  This material can be considered ‘open’ as long as one is looking for it during that period before it is cached. Williams, Terras, and Warwick (in press) recently completed a meta-study of over 550 academic articles that focused on Twitter. Of these, the researchers identified 53 studies that relate to mining Twitter content. These ranged from using tweets to offer better personalized news recommendations (Abel, Gao, Houben, and Tao 2011) to predicting flu trends (Achrekar, Gandhe, Lazarus, Yu, and Liu 2011; Chew, Eysenbach 2010) to attempts to predict the future (Asur, Huberman 2010) and the stock market (Bollen and Mao 2011). (The full database of Twitter-related research developed by Williams et al. will be appearing online, Terras pers. comm.). The other facet of user-generated content that we wish to mine is the world of archaeological blogging. Blogging, it should be noted, is not a genre of writing, but rather a platform for writing and for the rapid dissemination of material onto the web.  Nevertheless, the caricature of blogging is that it is the narcissistic shouting into the void about narrow, meaningless, ephemera; that it is ‘noise’ in contrast to the strong ‘signal’ that a peer-reviewed journal might provide. How then can anything useful be found in this open environment? Until the advent of Google, there was no good answer to this question. Google is not a search engine, nor a catalog, nor an index: it is a massive experiment in prediction. Google benefits from the billions of searches that we the users perform every week. In essence, we are teaching the machine what is useful when we select one result out of the millions provided. Google observes this. Google uses over 200 such signals to match useful information to each individual user, who each have their own idea of what constitutes ‘useful’ (Levy 2010). Blogging as a medium creates strong signals. Academic blogs tend to have a very tight focus (notable examples are Bill Caraher’s _New Archaeology of the Mediterranean World_ and Colleen Morgan’s _Middle Savagery_). They are updated fairly regularly, as the academic incorporates them into his or her work cycles. They focus on a comparative narrow range of topics, and are thus semantically tight. The anchor text for links tends to be rather unique combinations of words, and thus provide more signal to Google’s algorithm. A static, rarely-updated website (like many academic department websites) does not provide strong signals, and thus is not often returned in search results. Blogs and other high-signal sites like Wikipedia are displayed first. Research shows that most users never look further than the first few results provided by any search engine (Jansen and Spink 2006: 260). To the wider world, only that which is blogged, tweeted, or written about on Wikipedia, exists; that which is hidden behind a paywall, does not. **Data Collection Methods** In practice the web is infinite. Our project attempts to monitor that slice of it which is open, accessible, and taking place on Twitter, on blogs, using RSS feeds, automatic news aggregators, and other web 2.0 tools (cf. Kansa and Kansa 2011). We use an integrated environment for marshalling this data called ‘Ushahidi’. The word ‘ushahidi’ is a Swahili word meaning ‘testimony’. Ushahidi was developed in Kenya to map reports of violence after the bitterly contested elections of 2008 (Ushahidi 2012). It accepts information submitted via web form, email, and cell-phone short-message-service. It can also be used to collect RSS feeds and to trawl Twitter, copying tweets that contain particular keywords. We set Ushahidi to search Twitter for #looting, #antiquities, #looted, #illicit. The search will also turn up results without the # symbol; the convention on Twitter however is to indicate descriptive keywords for one’s ‘tweet’ by using the # symbol in conjunction with the keyword. This allows for more effective searching, and for users to follow developing conversations even if they themselves do not follow all the participants in the conversation. We are subscribed to feeds from _Art Theft Central; Conflict Antiquities; Illicit Cultural Property; Looting Matters; _and _Saving Antiquities for Everyone_. We also have a saved search at Google News that returns items based on the keywords ‘looted antiquities’. As of April 12, 2012, we have over 1300 items in the queue from these feeds with approximately 50 to 100 new items appearing each day – firehose indeed! In the first quarter of 2012 we have culled 207 reports from this stream. Ushahidi is also a form of simple GIS, wherein each report is also categorized and tied to a geographical location. **Analytical Methods**

## Comments

**[Shawn](#6982 "2012-06-08 14:31:09"):** Hi Francis, Thank you for your note. Re your question - You can put the txts (in whatever order works for you; we went for creation-date) into a single zip file, and then you upload that single zip file. Good luck!

**[Francis Deblauwe (@fdeblauwe)](#6981 "2012-06-08 14:14:32"):** Very interesting approach! Thank you for sharing. One quick question: in Voyant, is there a way to easily upload/target multiple texts/web pages? (I have a test in mind but it involves 70+ web pages)

**[Maureen Malloy](#7018 "2012-06-14 10:13:23"):** maybe I missed it, but what are the four videos that corrrespond with the spike in frequency noted in early March?

**[Shawn](#7024 "2012-06-15 13:35:20"):** Ah... there ought to be a foot note there with that info. If you go to https://heritage.crowdmap.com/reports/# you can filter by media content and date range to pull up the relevant reports. https://heritage.crowdmap.com/reports/view/124 https://heritage.crowdmap.com/reports/view/125 https://heritage.crowdmap.com/reports/view/126 https://heritage.crowdmap.com/reports/view/127

**[Shawn](#7008 "2012-06-12 20:18:14"):** June 12: I inadvertently broke the link to the Looted Heritage website, in the first paragraph. I apologize and have corrected this. http://heritage.crowdmap.com

**[exterminators schools real estate in etowah county](#11596 "2013-12-12 09:14:09"):** Hey there would you mind stating which blog platform you're using? I'm planning to start my own blog soon but I'm having a difficult time making a decision between BlogEngine/Wordpress/B2evolution and Drupal. The reason I ask is because your design and style seems different then most blogs and I'm looking for something complletely unique. P.S Sorry for getting off-topic but I had to ask!

**[Christal](#15987 "2014-02-17 17:09:28"):** Link exchange is nothing else however it is simply placing the other person's website link on your page at suitable place and other person will also do similar in support of you.

**[xbox 350](#11316 "2013-11-29 18:36:11"):** Hi colleagues, its fantastic article regading cultureand fully defined, keep it up all the time.

