title: Networks from artefacts ...and a way to reanimate the same
link: http://electricarchaeology.ca/2012/03/12/networks-from-artefacts-and-a-way-to-reanimate-the-same/
author: fhg1711
description: 
post_id: 1391
created: 2012/03/12 11:34:06
created_gmt: 2012/03/12 16:34:06
comment_status: open
post_name: networks-from-artefacts-and-a-way-to-reanimate-the-same
status: publish
post_type: post

# Networks from artefacts ...and a way to reanimate the same

[below is the draft text of a talk I will be delivering on March 16th, 2012, at Dumbarton Oaks. Usual caveats apply. If you spot anything odd, please let me know.] 

[slideshare id=11974619&doc=networksfromartefacts-120312111710-phpapp02]

**Networks from Artefacts**

 Trevor Hodge, a distinguished professor of classical archaeology and a former professor at Carleton University, passed away recently.[**slide 2]** I was supposed to attend a lecture of his in early February, but due to the regular rhythms of life at a university, meetings and duties conspired against me and I never heard him speak; and now I'll never have the chance. I deeply regret this, because I wanted to tell him what an impact his book on Roman aqueducts and water supply had on me as a young graduate student. Through Hodge's book, I had a connection to Prof. Hodge that always felt personal. We understand that kind of social connection that can exist through the network of author - book - reader. That kind of relationship has influence, and matters: otherwise we would never publish anything [**slide 3]**.  As a student, Hodge and the aqueducts led me to the construction industry of Rome, and thence to the brick industry more specifically. At first, it seemed a dry and sterile field. But then I encountered formal social network analysis, and suddenly, I had real people on my hands again, real people whose actions in the past I could dimly perceive. In the same way that books can connect us, artefacts can become nodes in a network. [**slide 4]** Artefacts are the result of human, individual, decisions. They influenced other individuals at the time through their complex resonances of thing and place and object life-history. By considering artefacts and their relationships explicitly in terms of social network analysis, we reconnect with the individual in the past, and we obtain a perspective that allows us to see what kinds of actions were possible in the past, patterns of agency and structure, that those actors themselves could not see. Anytime one can discern a relationship, it becomes possible to draw a network. In which case, theories of evolving networks & social network analysis should concern us all. Tom Brughmans recently argued (2010) that the 'social' should be taken out of the analysis, that we should just be concerned with the networks themselves. I'm not sure I entirely agree. Fiona Coward (2010) wrote, " ... the archaeological record is not a passive by-product of social relationships: rather, it is social relationships (Gamble 1999, 2007; Barrett, 2000[1988]; Knappett 2005). The patterning of material culture is a direct result of the social relationships between individuals and groups in which these objects were caught up. A network perspective provides a much more realistic picture, not only of objective sociality, but also potentially of individuals' subjective experience of their worlds" But as Scott Weingart warns us, we also have to take into account the dangers of methodology appropriation. Network analysis comes to us from graph theory, from statistics, from computer science. The methods, philosophies and concerns of those disciplines are not necessarily congruent with archaeology: "Methodology appropriation is dangerous. Even when the people designing a methodology for some specific purpose get it right – and they rarely do – there is often a score of theoretical and philosophical caveats that get lost when the methodology gets translated. In the more frequent case, when those caveats are not known to begin with, "borrowing" the methodology becomes even more dangerous." http://digitalhumanitiesnow.org/2012/02/demystifying-networks-part-1-2-by-scott-weingart/ In which case, let me show you how I draw networks out of the urban fabric of Rome and Constantinople trying to navigate the shoals of this dangerous method, and let us consider what these networks might mean for understanding the way Constantinople and her people worked. And then let's push it a step further by reanimating those networks with agent based models. Let's raise the dead. \--- We’ll start with Rome. This is a typical second century stamped brick from the industry centred on Rome. Other major cities all had their own industries (and occasionally, loads of stamped brick from places like Rome turn up in places like North Africa or Sardinia). The interpretation of stamped brick throughout the Roman world ultimately comes down to recasting the local version in light of what scholars believe was happening around the City of Rome. Brick stamping at Rome began in the first century and ran, with some interruptions, until the 6th century. A typical second century brick looks like this [_CIL_ XV.1 861][**slide 5]**

EX FIG ASINIAE QVADRATILLAE O D C NVN

NIDI FORTUNAT LVCIO

QVADRATO COS

Signum: pine nut. The consensus is that these elements represents an abridged version of the contract between the _officinator_ and the _dominus. Locatio-conductio_ contracts were one of the usual means of letting out building contracts. In this context there are two varieties. _Locatio rei_ refers to the plant and property used, while _locatio operis_ refers to the finished product itself. Both types firmly involve the _dominus _in production. If the stamp is an abridged _locatio operis _contract, then the _dominus_ paid the _officinator _to make a certain amount of bricks. If on the other hand, the stamp refers to _locatio rei_, then the entrepreneur is the _officinator_, contracting with the landowner to use his land for the _officinator_’s own profit. These are, of course, social relationships, whatever kind of contract. Brick and brick stamps are ideal things for archaeological network analysis. To produce brick means having the ability to command resources, to control land, and to be tied into the webwork of patronage that physically creates humanity’s machine for living, the city. In terms of how the stamps actually functioned in day-to-day life, one can imagine them serving multiple roles: distinguishing the output of different _officinatores_ working side by side; for compensation or verification that the work has been carried out; to indicate the products of different _figlinae_ belonging to one _dominus_; or different _domini_ who used the same warehouse. From legal texts and other notices in the ancient literature, it seems likely that in Rome and in Constantinople, a certain proportion of bricks were levied annually for maintenance of public works. Brickstamps from Constantinople sometimes bear the phrase, ‘indiktionos’, ‘of the indiction’ without referring to the year in the cycle, which Bardill takes to mean that they were stamped to indicate that tax liabilities imposed by the annual indictio on the owners of clay lands had met their obligations. *** So that’s a potted history of brick stamp ology. The practice of stamping bricks at Rome continues into the reigns of the Gothic kings, and so is contemporaneous with stamping practice at Constantinople. A typical stamped brick from Constantinople is more difficult to interpret, but again can contain names and years and other signs in various combination. The question is, what can we do with this information? What might it all actually mean, when put into perspective? \---

## Comments

**[John Taylor-Montoya, Ph.D.](#6323 "2012-03-27 15:42:07"):** Very interesting stuff. I love the potential that NetLogo offers for modeling network processes. Although it wasn't framed this way in your talk, necessarily, it's a form of hypothesis testing. At least, that's the aspect I'm interested in the most.

**[Shawn](#6337 "2012-03-28 12:32:19"):** Hi John, I've been working on a paper for a while now right along those lines (although I've let it sit idle for a few months... time, energy!). You might also be interested in my travellersim paper as a way to test hypotheseses concerning social networks in space. Full text is here on the blog or via my academia.edu page.

