title: A teaching philosophy in practice
link: http://electricarchaeology.ca/2012/03/29/a-teaching-philosophy-in-practice/
author: fhg1711
description: 
post_id: 1422
created: 2012/03/29 14:11:05
created_gmt: 2012/03/29 19:11:05
comment_status: open
post_name: a-teaching-philosophy-in-practice
status: publish
post_type: post

# A teaching philosophy in practice

My field nowadays is the digital humanities; I started my academic life as an archaeologist. In between, I’ve taught in continuing education, distance education, secondary education to troubled students, and started a business. My philosophy of teaching has evolved continually as a result of these disparate experiences. I was attracted to archaeology by the hands-on nature of the field, by the materiality of it. I became interested in distance education and continuing education for how these two modes opened up academia to broader audiences than a standard undergraduate experience. Working with troubled teens (students whom the system had otherwise failed), I saw both of these strands come together in a program that offered a hands-on experience leading to a vocational diploma. Starting a business taught me that I had to relearn everything I thought I already knew. I recount these experiences to explain where I am coming from. I first encountered the idea of ‘uncoverage’ in a blog post on Profhacker by Mark Sample. This phrase neatly encapsulates what I have come to believe. In Sample’s post, he defines ‘uncoverage’ by contrasting it with how we normally use the phrase in course syllabi: “…this course will cover the evolution of American public life from the publication of the Federalist Papers to…”. In the race to cover everything on the syllabus, we necessarily end up _covering_ in the sense of ‘protect or conceal, to hide from view’ (Sample, citing Wiggins and McTighe 106). We do not teach understanding; rather we slip and slide over the top of the deeper issues that make these topics worth studying in the first place. For Sample, ‘uncoverage’ then is a kind of digging downwards, to reveal the assumptions and principles that we would normally _cover. _There is an obvious connection here with archaeology. In archaeology, one begins with the most recent layers and works backward, peeling away the events that form a site, understanding their associations and connections both in terms of breadth and depth. In the same way one would plan an archaeological excavation backwards from the idea ‘what do we wish to learn from this site?’ I implement backwards-design philosophies into my classes: in order to uncover that which is important, what must students understand as a result of having been in this course? My ambition in every course is to teach for uncoverage. This has the effect of making my research and teaching two sides of the same craft. As a craftsman, I want my work to be visible, public and appreciated. My students therefore are both objects of my craft, and independent craftspeople in their own right. I seek out opportunities for my students’ work to become visible as together we work through the implications of digital media for historical understanding. Digital history is public history: therefore my students’ work is never conceived of as being done for an audience of one. As I tell my students, ‘we’re working without a net, folks: everything we do, we do in public’. I have published papers, articles, blogs and projects with students as a result. I have blogged my own teaching and research for five years now. I am committed to open access, making not only my process but also my data available to the wider community. Not every experiment results in success; indeed, the failures are richer experiences because as academics we are loathe to say when something _did not work - _but how else will anybody know that a particular method, or approach, is flawed? This idea that it is ‘safe to fail’ at something, that sometimes what we try just might not work, is something that I try to foster in my classes. If we try something, it does not work, and we then critically analyze why that should be, we have in fact entered a circle of positive feedback. This perspective comes from my research into game based learning. A good game keeps the challenges just ahead of the player’s (student’s) ability, to create a state of _flow_. Too hard, and the player quits; too easy, and the player drops the controller in disgust. If we can design assessment exercises in a class that tap into this state of flow, then we can create the conditions for continual learning and growth (see for instance Kee, Graham, et al. 2009). What is more important is that these can be tailored to an individual student’s abilities. Why should assessment in a class begin at 100 points and then work downwards? Why not begin at zero and allow the student to rise? My approach to teaching has changed over the years, and it will no doubt evolve in the future. What I hope to make a constant though is a commitment to celebrate in public the excellent work that my students do, whether that is sharing their blog posts on Twitter, to finding opportunities to publish with them, to finding collaborative projects with the wider community. By teaching for uncoverage, and by exploring the affordances of digital media for historical representation and analysis, I am able to marry the strands of my own evolution as a student, research and teacher, into the best opportunities for my students. **Putting the digital into my humanities** HIST2809 I teach one of the History Department’s core courses in historical method, HIST2809: The Historian’s Craft. This class has a large enrolment of typically 120 students. Instead of surveying the many different ways historians write history and do historical research, I focus instead on cultivating a deeper understanding of the reflexive nature of historical work, so that when students encounter a new possible method or approach they do so with a critical understanding of not just what the approach offers, but also how it delineates what it possible to say or uncover. I emphasize that historical work is not done in a vacuum, but is done within a community of practice. To support this teaching, I created a Wordpress powered website that I extended with the Buddypress plugin. Buddypress allows for the customized creation of a social network platform - a HIST2809 Facebook, if you will. Then, I ‘gamified’ this space by creating ‘achievements’ that students could work towards, with their progress being visible to other members of the classroom. This approach was written about by Nick Ward in _This Week in FASS:_

> ‘I wanted students to have more opportunities to practice the ‘craft’ of being an historian, beyond the formal assessments in the class. Obviously, I could’ve assigned weekly exercises, but that would’ve gone against some of the spirit of what I was trying to inculcate in my students-that being an historian is about being part of a community, that there is joy and surprise and discipline in being an historian, and that most of all, one has to want to do these things – to that end, the achievements system was entirely voluntary (but with a healthy dose of competition).’ In this gamified approach, the students started at zero and tried to collect as many points as possible.  All participants would get a small bonus to their participation grade, proportional to the number of points they’d collected. Some of the game challenges included transcribing lines of ancient papyrus, learning the rhetorics embedded in computer code, completing tutorials on logical fallacies, learning some Latin, and participating in online crowdsourcing history projects (including HeritageCrowd.org, Graham’s own experiment in crowdsourcing local cultural heritage knowledge)."

As a result of including participation in the running of some of my own research projects into the achievements system, some of my students became involved in community digital history projects. One student is now a lead author on the writing of a regimental history for one of Ottawa’s military units. Another student became a co-author with me on a case study of the project to crowd-source local history.

## Comments

**[male models](#16198 "2014-02-18 16:42:19"):** Underwear models have specific toning needs, and this workout addresses each of those unique areas including the biceps, quadriceps, upper and lower chest, abs and even the back. If you are looking for cheap road bikes buy an older model and the older the better. The ever-increasing popularity of designer underwear for fashion conscious males seems to ensure the future of male modeling, for both famous celebrities and simply professional individuals.

**[Skye](#15804 "2014-02-16 18:33:41"):** Hello! Do you use Twitter? I'd like to follow you if that would be ok. I'm definitely enjoying your blog and look forward to new updates.

**[appartement cologny](#15793 "2014-02-16 17:29:47"):** May I simply just say what a relief to uncover an individual who really knows what they are discussing online. You actually realize how to bring an issue to light and make it important. A lot more people need to look at this and understand this side of your story. I was surprised you are not more popular because you definitely possess the gift.

**[www.youtube.com](#15864 "2014-02-17 00:47:48"):** What's up Dear, are you actually visiting this web site regularly, if so afterward you will definitely get good know-how.

**[asos promo online coupons amazon](#20520 "2014-03-06 09:08:13"):** LGN Revolution has forever removed the guesswork out of marketing the program thereby ensuring that you become successful quickly. Because of large donations to Israel, there was a statue of her father-in- law in Haifa. Once you have bought (and saved on) your business supplies using Office Depot coupon codes, remember to recycle and recycle some more.

**[horror movies 2014](#20598 "2014-03-06 17:51:32"):** I usually do not drop a comment, but I browsed some comments on A teaching philosophy in practice | Electric Archaeology. I actually do have a few questions for you if you don't mind. Could it be simply me or does it look like some of the remarks come across like they are left by brain dead people? :-P And, if you are posting at other sites, I'd like to follow anything fresh you have to post. Could you list of the complete urls of all your social community sites like your linkedin profile, Facebook page or twitter feed?

**[communited.yolasite.com](#16232 "2014-02-18 21:31:25"):** Unless you're playing using a Scrabble champion, most players take a great deal to strategize and build a thing that would give them the most effective advantage. Check out my other Webkinz articles to get more codes. Users can watch game replays and report suspect cheaters to Treyarch who's hired the full-time employee taskforce to evaluate there submissions for bugs and cheaters.

**[wyniki live](#17466 "2014-02-24 02:13:09"):** I've been browsing online greater than 3 hours lately, but I by no means found any attention-grabbing article like yours. It is pretty worth sufficient for me. Personally, if all site owners and bloggers made just right content as you probably did, the internet might be much more useful than ever before.

**[paste code snippets](#19299 "2014-03-01 13:07:04"):** What's up, I check your blog daily. Your story-telling style is awesome, keep doing what you're doing!

**[asos promo code august 2012](#19174 "2014-03-01 04:40:33"):** Just like their female counterparts, men can look trendy as properly. BLOOMINGDALE'S ' Big Brown Bag Sale ' Save 20 to 65 percent and take an additional 20 percent off sale items with code TAKE20 at online checkout. Sometimes you try to purchase your favorite product on discount through some coupon code and after making the purchase you find out that code you used were expired.

**[http://remedesudationexcessive.blogspot.com/](#19810 "2014-03-03 08:10:35"):** Good site you've got here.. It's hard to find good quality writing like yours these days. I honestly appreciate individuals like you! Take care!!

**[compra de vinos en sevilla](#18999 "2014-02-28 17:00:22"):** What's up, every time i used to check web site posts here early in the daylight, because i love to gain knowledge of more and more.

**[womens workout clothes cheap](#19353 "2014-03-01 15:58:20"):** That is a good tip particularly to those fresh to the blogosphere. Brief but very precise information… Appreciate your sharing this one. A must read article!

