title: Graeworks - my tenure and promotion online portfolio
link: http://electricarchaeology.ca/2013/05/27/1781/
author: fhg1711
description: 
post_id: 1781
created: 2013/05/27 19:50:38
created_gmt: 2013/05/28 00:50:38
comment_status: open
post_name: 1781
status: publish
post_type: post

# Graeworks - my tenure and promotion online portfolio

My online tenure & promotion portfolio may be viewed at [graeworks.net](http://graeworks.net) It is a work in progress, so I would welcome comments and suggestions. I will be applying for t&p this coming autumn. The department is currently in the midst of setting its own discipline specific language for what counts for tenure, and what counts for promotion. There's been a lot of hard work on it, and I'm glad to see that there is specific recognition for digital work on its own merits (and not by drawing false equivalencies with print media). I have the option of going up under the earlier non-specific language, but I think I'll swing for the bleachers here.

## Comments

**[2013 black friday christian louboutin](#11261 "2013-11-27 23:22:52"):** 9999 The work you have accomplished has gotten you this far. These station replica handbags are frequently the clone for your genuine breathtaking channel totes. 2013 black friday christian louboutin http://www.brooklynphotoblog.com/black-Friday-louboutin.html

**[Kristina Killgrove (@DrKillgrove)](#10202 "2013-05-27 20:34:37"):** This is awesome, Shawn! I love your website and am considering a digital portfolio myself when it comes time for my tenure review (not for a few years yet, though). I'm looking forward to hearing how your tenure case goes. And if you can share your tenure guidelines when they're finally set, I'd be interested in reading them. We don't currently have any on-line or digital equivalencies, so I'm currently counting blogging and other digital projects as pure "service."

**[Kitchen renovation](#11811 "2013-12-22 23:57:38"):** Online affiliates make the mistake of stuffing their sites with advertising banners that do not provide enough information about the product or services that they are trying to sell. Delivery is by DHL, UPS or EMS and should take 3 to 5 business days to arrive. Well, except for the fact that there is so much information that you have no clue where to even begin.

**[Shawn](#10210 "2013-05-28 08:41:41"):** Hi Kristina, Thanks! If I can share, I definitely will. I'm trying to count blogging etc as impact and part of my research, by framing my entire research agenda as an investigation into the ways digital media foster historical consciousness. We shall see what happens... Your blog is awesome, so here's hoping...!

**[XIC](#11616 "2013-12-13 13:18:26"):** An effective business card represents the image of a company and is always needed by its business personnel. A large amount of money can be saved and thus used elsewhere just by making a few basic changes in this area. However, it will also make you look less professional than if you go to an outside vendor for your business printing needs.

**[panic away any good](#11733 "2013-12-19 03:43:05"):** He is the founder of Philly Hypnosis, The Philadelphia area's Premiere Neuro-Medical Hypnosis Practice. His expertise deals with controlling the symptoms of stress and anxiety by applying proven, natural treatments for panic that bring results in minutes. Commit a few minutes petting Fido to uncover oneself refreshed and a bit a lot more peaceful.

**[home repair tips](#11800 "2013-12-22 19:51:10"):** In short, when it comes to email marketing the tips we have mentioned should be followed if you really wish to succeed. The best way to turn a prospect into a customer is to send them a newsletter because people sometimes need more information before they will buy from you. This is often followed up with a free gift or offer to provide value to your subscribers immediately.

**[latanyajczzy.wordpress.com](#11902 "2013-12-27 06:41:36"):** If you don't build muscle along with healthy eating and cardio, you will soon see a skeleton with a six pack of ribs and that is not an attractive sight, nor is it healthy. As many rounds as you can in 20 minutes, perform the following in sequence:. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania is one of the homes to Gold's gym.

**[Winston](#11574 "2013-12-11 06:00:32"):** All this by learning how you can eat the correct foods for weight loss in addition to a small exercise. All this by learning the way to consume the proper foods for weight loss merged with a small physical exercise. Not only did he achieve his fat loss goals, the steps he took also served as a foundation for his system which he shares with you in his guide.

**[free download of flappy bird](#18498 "2014-02-27 10:41:00"):** You've made some good points there. I checked on the net for more info about the issue and found most people will go along with your views on this web site.

