title: Reanimating Networks with Agent Modeling
link: http://electricarchaeology.ca/2013/03/29/reanimating-networks-with-agent-modeling/
author: fhg1711
description: 
post_id: 1737
created: 2013/03/29 11:41:01
created_gmt: 2013/03/29 16:41:01
comment_status: open
post_name: reanimating-networks-with-agent-modeling
status: publish
post_type: post

# Reanimating Networks with Agent Modeling

I'm presenting next week at the Society for American Archaeology Annual Meeting. I'm giving two papers. One argues for parsimonious models when we do agent based modeling.  The other reverses the flow of archaeological network analysis and instead of finding nets in the archaeology, I use agent based models to generate networks that help me understand the archaeology. (The session is 'Connected Past'.) Here is the draft of my talk, with all the usual caveats that that entails. Parts of it have been drawn from an unpublished piece that discusses this methodology and the results in much greater detail. It will appear.... eventually. Scott Weingart has been an enormous help in all of this.[ You should follow his work. ](http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/?page_id=22226) http://www.slideshare.net/DoctorG/graham-weingart-connected-past-reanimating-networks-with-agent-modeling My interests lie in the social networks surrounding primary resource extraction in the Roman world. The Roman epigraphy of stamped brick easily lends itself to network analysis. One string together, like pearls, individual landowners, estate names, individual brick makers, signa, brick fabrics, and locations. This leads to very complicated, multi-dimensional networks. When I first started working with this material, I reduced this complexity by looking only at the humans, whom I tied together based on appearing in the same stamp type together. I called these ‘producer’ networks. I then looked at the ties implied by the shared use of fabrics, or the co-location of brick stamp types at various findspots, and called these ‘manufacturing’ networks. I then sliced these networks up by reigning dynasty, and developed a story to account for their changing shapes over time. This was in the late 1990s, and in terms of network theorists I had largely only Granovetter, Hanneman & Riddle, and Strogatz & Watts to go on. The story I told was little more than a just-so story, like how the Camel got its Hump. I had the shape, I had points where I could hang the story, but I couldn’t account for how I got from the shape of the network in the Julio-Claudian period, to that of the Flavian, to that of the Antonines. I've done a lot of work on networks since then; now I want to know what generates these networks that we see archaeologically, in the first place. In this talk today, I want to reverse the direction of my inquiry. We are all agreed that we can find networks in our archaeological materials. The problem, I think, for us, is to explain the network processes that produce these patterns, and then to use our understanding of those processes to narrow down the possible entangled human & thing interactions that could give rise to these possible processes. We need to be able to understand the possible behaviour-spaces that could produce the networks we see, to tease out the inevitable from the contingent. We need to be able to rigorously explore the emergent or unintended consequences of the stories we tell. The only way I know how to do that systematically, is to encode those stories as computer code, to turn them from normal, archaeological storytelling rhetoric, to computational procedural rhetoric. So this is what we did. One story we tell about the Roman world, that might be useful for understanding things like the exploitation of land for building materials, is that its social economy functioned like a ‘bazaar’. According to Peter Bang, the Roman economic system is best understood as a complex, agrarian tributary empire, of a kind similar to the Ottoman or Mughal (Bang 2006; 2008).  Bang (2006: 72-9) draws attention to the concept of the bazaar. The bazaar was a complete social system that incorporated the small peddler with larger merchants, long distance trade, with a smearing of categories of role and scale. The bazaar emerged from the interplay of instability and fragmentation. The mechanisms developed to cope with these reproduced that same instability and fragmentation. Bang identifies four key mechanisms that did this: small parcels of capital (to combat risk, cf Skydsgaard 1976); little homogenization of products (agricultural output and quality varied year by year, and region by region as Pliny discusses in Naturalis Historia 12 and 18); opportunism; and social networks (80-4). As Bang demonstrates, these characteristics correspond well with the archaeology of the Roman economy and the picture we know from legal and other text. Bang’s model of the bazaar (2008; 2006), and the role of social networks within that model, can be simulated computationally. What follows is a speculative attempt to do so, and should be couched in all appropriate caveats and warnings. The model simulates the extraction of various natural resources, where social connections may emerge between individuals as a consequence of the interplay of the environment, transaction costs, and the agent's knowledge of the world. If the networks generated from the computational simulation of our models for the ancient economy correspond to those we see in the ancient evidence , we have a powerful tool for exploring antiquity, for playing with different ideas about how the ancient world worked (cf. Dibble 2006). Computation might be able to bridge our models and our evidence. In particular, I mean, ‘agent based modeling’. Agent based modelling is an approach to simulation that focuses on the individual. In an agent based model, the agents or individuals are autonomous computing objects. They are their own programmes. They are allowed to interact within an environment (which frequently represents some real-world physical environment). Every agent has the same suite of variables but each agent’s individual combination of variables is unique (if it was a simulation of an ice-hockey game, every agent would have a ‘speed’ variable, and an ‘ability’ variable, and so the nature of every game would be unique). Agents can be aware of each other and the state of the world (or their location within it), depending on the needs of the simulation. It is a tool to simulate how we believe a particular phenomenon worked in the past. When we simulate, we are interrogating our own understandings and beliefs. The model imagines a ‘world’ (‘gameboard’ would not be an inappropriate term) in which help is necessary to find and consume resources. The agents do not know when or where resources will appear or become exhausted. By accumulating resources, and ‘investing’ in improvements to make extraction easier, agents can accrue prestige. When agents get into ‘trouble’ (they run out of resources) they can examine their local area and become a ‘client’ of someone with more prestige than themselves.  It is an exceedingly simple simulation, and a necessary simplification of Bang’s ‘Bazaar’ model, but one that captures the essence and exhibits subtle complexity in its results. The resulting networks can be imported into social network analysis software like Gephi. It is always better to start with a simple simulation, even at the expense of fidelity to the phenomenon under consideration, on the grounds that it is easier to understand and interpret outputs. A simple model can always be made more complex when we understand what it is doing and why; a complex model is rather the inverse, its outcomes difficult to isolate and understand.