title: Some Assembly Required: teaching through/with/about/by/because of, the Digital Humanities (slides & notes)
link: http://electricarchaeology.ca/2013/04/30/some-assembly-required-slides-notes/
author: fhg1711
description: 
post_id: 1755
created: 2013/04/30 13:42:26
created_gmt: 2013/04/30 18:42:26
comment_status: open
post_name: some-assembly-required-slides-notes
status: publish
post_type: post

# Some Assembly Required: teaching through/with/about/by/because of, the Digital Humanities (slides & notes)

****I'm giving a keynote address to the [Canadian Network for Innovation in Education](http://www6.carleton.ca/cnie2013/) conference, at Carleton on [Thursday ](http://www6.carleton.ca/cnie2013/conference-agenda/)(10.30, River Building). I've never done a keynote before, so I'll confess to being a bit nervous. 'Provoke!' I've been told. 'Inspire! Challenge!' Well, here goes.... These are the slides and the more-or-less complete speaker's notes. I often write things out, and then completely adlib on the day, but this is more or less the flavour I'm going for. http://www.slideshare.net/DoctorG/some-assembly-required-teaching-throughwithaboutbybecause-of-the-digital-humanities **[Title]** I never appreciated how scary those three words were until I had kids. 'Some assembly required'. That first Christmas was all, slide Tab A into Slot B. Where's the 5/8ths gripley? Is that an Allen key? Why are there so many screws left over? The toys, with time, get broken, get fixed, get recombined with different play sets, are the main characters and the exotic locales for epic stories. I get a lot of mileage out of the stories my kids tell and act out with these toys. My job is the DH guy in the history department. DH, as I see it, is a bit like the way my kids play with the imperfectly built things - it's about making things, about breaking things, about being playful with those things. This talk is about what that kind of perspective might imply for our teaching and learning. **[2]** I don't know what persuaded my parents that it'd be a good idea to spend $300 in 1983 dollars on a Vic20, but I'm glad they did. You turn on your ipad, it all just happens magically, whoosh! In those days, if you had a computer, you had to figure out how to make it do stuff, the hard way. A bit disappointing, that first 'Ready' prompt. Ready to do what? My brothers and I wanted to play games. So, we sat down to learn how to program them.  If you had a vic-20, do you remember how exciting it was when that ball first bounced off the corners of your screen? A bit like the apes in the opening scene of '2001'.  At least, in our house. **[3]** ‘Wargame’, film with Matthew Broderick. This scared me; but I loved the idea of being able to reach out to someone else, someone far from where I lived in Western Quebec. So we settled for occasional trips to the Commodore store in Ottawa, bootleg copies of Compute! Magazine, and my most treasured book, a ‘how to make adventure games’ manual for kids, that my Aunt purchased for me at the Ontario Science centre. **[4]** Do you remember old-school text adventures? They’re games! They promote reading! Literacy! They are a Good Thing. Let’s play a bit of this game, ‘Action Castle’, to remind us how they worked. To play an interactive fiction is to foreground how the rules work; it’s easy to see, with IF. But that same interrogation needs to happen whenever we encounter digital media. **[5]** Games like Bioshock - a criticism of Randian philosophy. Here, the interplay between the rules and the illusion of agency are critical to making the argument work. When you play any kind of game, or interact with any kind of medium, you generally achieve success once you begin to think like the machine. What do games teach us? How to play the game: how to think like a computer. This is a ‘cyborg’ consciousness. The ‘cyb’ in ‘Cyborg’ comes from the greek for ‘governor’ or ‘ship’s captain’. Who is doing the governing? The code. This is why humanities NEEDS to consider the digital. It’s too important to leave to the folks who are already good at thinking like machines. This is the first strand of what ‘digital humanities’ might mean. **[6]** A second strand comes from that same impulse that my brothers and I had - let’s make something! Trying to make something on the computer inevitably leads to deformation. This deformation can be on purpose, like an artist; or it can be accidental, a result of either the user’s skill or the way that the underlying code imagines the world to work. ** [7]** ‘Historical Friction’ is my attempt to realize a day-dream: what if the history of a place was thick enough to impede movement through it? I knew that I could find a) enough information about virtually everywhere on Wikipedia; that b) I could access this through mobile computing and c) something that often stops me in my tracks is not primarily visual but rather auditory. But I don’t have the coding chops to build something like that from scratch. What I can do, though, is mash things together, sometimes. But when I do that, I’m beholden to design choices others have made. ‘Historical Friction’ is my first stab at this, welding someone else’s Wikipedia tool to someone else’s voice synthesizer. Let’s take a listen. …So this second strand of DH is to deform (with its connotations of a kind of performance) different ways of knowing. **[8]** A third strand of DH comes from the reflexive use of technology. My training is in archaeology. As an archaeologist, I became Eastern Canada’s only expert in Roman Brick Stamps. Not a lot of call for that. But I recognized that I could use this material to extract fossilized social networks, that the information in the stamps was all about connections. Once I had this social network, I began to wonder how I could reanimate it, and so I turned to simulation modeling. After much exploration, I’ve realized that what I resurrect on these social networks is NOT the past, but rather the story I am telling about the past. I simulate historiography. I create a population of zombie Romans (individual computing objects) and I give them rules of behavior that describe some phenomenon in the past that I am interested in. These rules are formulated at the level of the individual. I let the zombies go, and watch how they interact. In this way, I develop a way to interrogate the unintended or emergent consequences of the story I tell about the past: a kind of probabilistic historiography. So DH allows me to deform my own understandings of the world; it allows me to put the stories I tell to the test. **[9]recap** There’s an awful lot of work that goes under the rubric of ‘digital humanities’. But these three strands are I think the critical ones for understanding what university teaching informed by DH might look like. **[10]** Did I mention my background was in archaeology? There’s a lot that goes under the rubric of ‘experimental’ archaeology that ties in to or is congruent with the digital humanities as well. Fundamentally, you might file it under the caption of ‘making as a way of knowing’. **[11]** Experimental archaeology has been around for decades. So too has DH (and its earlier incarnation as ‘humanities computing’) which goes back to at least the 1940s and Father Busa, who famously persuaded IBM to give him a research lab and computer scientists to help him create his concordance of the work _praesans_ in the writings of Thomas Aquinas. So despite the current buzz, DH is not just a fad, but rather has (comparatively) deep antecedents. The ‘Humanities’ as an organizing concept in universities has scarcely been around for much longer. **[12]** So let’s consider then what DH implies for university teaching. **[13]salt** But I feel I should warn you. My abilities to forecast the future are entirely suspect. As an undergrad, in 1994, I was asked to go on the ‘world wide web’, this new thing, and create an annotated bibliography concerning as many websites as I could that dealt with the Etruscans. The first site I found (before the days of content filters) was headlined, ‘the Sex Communist Manifesto’. Unimpressed, I wrote a screed that began, “The so-called ‘world wide web’ will never be useful for academics.” Please do take everything I say then with a grain or two of salt. **[14]**